So the first year it was on rented land, the nurseries of all the genetic material from the upper five spring wheat states of the U.S.
and the Canada Department of Agriculture.
Then the second year it was on our research station in Ciudad de Obregón, which was the research station of the Mexican government in the Rockefeller Foundation.
send the seed down.
Sometimes Fletcher would come and help us plant it.
Then all of their scientists from each of the states would come down when the grain was ripening and harvest and take it back to their own stations.
Or they would select the plants and trash them out, and Fletcher would arrange to have it shipped back to Minneapolis, and then from there they would send it to all of the participating states.
And you see, this was the cut in half, like we had done for the last ten years, the time required for them to produce varieties.
And it was when they were down there that they began to see what was going on.
As a matter of fact, those first dwarfs, Fletcher took some of those, he says, can I cut some heads off those first F2s?
This was when, this must have been, let's see.
In the spring of 57, yeah, of 57,
in Sonora.
They were beautiful in all kinds of heights and whatnot.
I said, sure.
He said, I want to take them back and shell them out and give a few seeds to each of the research directors back in the five northwest states and also in Canada.
I said, take what you want except leave some of the heads on each plant.
But there was not much interest.
The idea at that time was that
These are all right for irrigation, but you can't use them under dry land, because this will make them too short.
Well, that was the false concept, because under dry land conditions, these things are slightly shorter, but they don't, they aren't shortened in the same way as the tall one is, with drought.
The degree of shortening, yeah, something like this.
But that wasn't known at that time.
So they thought this was a bunch of nonsense.
So it was quite a few years before.
Some of them started doing something about this.
Of course, at that early time, there was very little fertilizer used on spring wheats in the USA also.
The Western California, starting to be, and on the winter wheats in the state of Washington and Oregon were vocal that had been incorporating.
I would imagine that, well, it was several years before they started crossing.
And so, in other words, it wasn't through scholarly publications that word of your experiments got out.
It was basically through your colleagues and through governments.
One government to the next government.
That's right.
And in the same way, through this original vehicle, when this international rust nursery, when we saw some of these...
that were fairly uniform.
Immediately we put those, we always used to put in about 50 different wheats, that's all they would accept from us because the nursery got too big.
And as soon as we had, I think there were five that looked fairly uniform, we put them into this.
They went to Bellsville.
They multiplied the seed at that time, I think, in Puerto Rico because of corn tea.
Anyway, they went around the world.
This was, as a result of these, this was where Swami Naftan over in India saw these five little ones in 1960, 62.
But prior to that... And that's how India found out about your work then, in a sense.
Well, we're going to get to that.
I think I should say that by 60, by 1959, we had enough trained people, Mexicans,
good ones, so that the program was turned over to them when it was still part of the Mexican government and Rockefeller Foundation.
This was the first program, corn and all of the other programs.
We started out with corn, wheat, and beans, but later forage crops were added and quite a few other crops, potatoes and a whole series of them.
But we turned the responsibilities for the directorship of the program over to
Narvaez, Ignacio Narvaez, Dr. Ignacio Narvaez, N-A-R-V-A-E-Z, when he came back from Purdue in 1959.
And at that time, I continued to work with him.
Most of the Rockefeller staff, though, a year later, had been transferred.
But in 59, this gave me a chance to look at the wheat problems in many other countries.
first in 59, especially spend more time in each of the South American programs, Guatemala, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, Argentina, and Brazil.
And then following spring in 60, which was when the work of the Office of Special Studies, the Rockefeller Mexican government had terminated,
And the responsibilities had been transferred to the National Institute of Agricultural Research of Mexico, INIA.
But there were several of us who were still around in the transfer, working with them.
And it was then that the New York office of the foundation wanted me to have a look at the wheat problems from Morocco to India.
I should have said that my job was essentially finished.
Yeah, by the late 1950s.
By what we thought was the original purpose of the Mexican program.
Right.
Which was, of course, to make Mexico self-sufficient a week.
And turn the program over to them.
Yeah.
And so I talked to Mosman.
They didn't know what they were going to do at that time.
I said, why don't you let me work on soybeans?
No soybeans for the tropics at that time, or semi-tropics.
They argued about this for a while, and Carrar and Mosman, I don't know who else was all involved.
Eventually Mosman reached the decision, he says, hell, that's a waste of talent.
If you've got this much experience, you should stay in wheat.
We've got to find some way to make you effective on a broader scale.
Then with SAO, in the spring of 60, they sent me on this trip from Morocco to India.
And I visited whatever it was.
And we're going to get to that trip, and I don't want to talk about that, but I still have some questions about earlier.
One of the questions is training Mexican economists and scientists.
How did that come about?
Was that part of the original process?
And where did you send them to train them?
Well, the original purpose, one of the four objectives when the program was started was to train a core of Mexican scientists in all of the disciplines that affect food production, meaning agronomy and soils, plant breeding, plant pathology, entomology, cereal technology, the whole gamut of things.
And eventually it was economics and policy.
In the early years it was not.
And the training program from its conception was a hands-on type.
When I arrived, there's only one scientist that I thought had had any experience with experimental plots that
And that he had had sufficient background, so he knew research methodology.
The late Edmundo Tabuada, who died just about a year ago.
But he was essentially the only one.
And that meant that we had to train the whole corps of scientists.
The way it was done, young people who had gotten their first degree, they call it Ingeniero Agrónomo,
In Mexico, it follows the French system of education.
Most of them, since most of them didn't come from the land, it was a completely theoretical training.
And they were brought into the experimental stations where we worked.
They worked right with us, elbow to elbow, in all of the mechanics of the operation, generally for two years, sometimes three.
And from this group, we picked the best.
to send outside of the country for advanced graduate training, master's degree.
In the early years, none stayed straight through for a doctor.
They went for a master's and came back.
And the good ones we brought back into the training program with us to help train other young ones.
It was a pretty strong screening process.
You have to remember
And at that time there was no graduate school in any agricultural sciences anywhere in Latin America.
And it was painful because of the fact that English was, very few of these had any English background.
And that was an obstacle.
Still is.
And who paid for their education and where did you usually send them?
In those early years, the Rockefeller Foundation gave
At the master's level we called them scholarships, and at the doctor's level they were fellowships, but they were essentially the same.
I think they had never worked with all of their previous work in grants for education had been at doctorate level in chemistry or some other field of science in other countries.
So they made this distinction.
I think it was purely arbitrary.
Then the best ones would come back.
And, of course, there were many opportunities for employment, but we tried to keep some of the best with us.
Oh, yeah, much as seed companies or the federal government or someone would want to get a hold of them.
The first one nobody wanted, the first two.
They didn't know what the hell it was.
There were no jobs.
It was miserable.
And we put them back in the program, two of them.
The third one... When was that, mid-50s or...?
No, in the early 50s.
Early 50s.
Let's see.
Maybe even as early as, no, it was 47, 48, 49.
One of them that couldn't get a job became the organizer of the agricultural sciences at Monterey Tech.
And he remained there his whole career.
He just retired a year ago.
That became a top flight school and trained not only a lot of good Mexicans, but Central Americans, South Americans.
It's a private school.
I mean, you pay tuition and consequently it was never...
never had the troubles of strikes like so many of the government schools have had, not only in Mexico but in Latin America in general.
So, they worked for many different institutions, depending on where we thought they'd get the best training in the discipline.
For example, in plant pathology, some of the early ones went to Minnesota, to Wisconsin, and to Purdue.
In soils, very often they went to Cornell and to Iowa State.
And Iowa State also got quite a few in genetics, plant breeding.
But they went to many different institutions.
Some of them went on beans.
They went to Colorado and I guess even to Idaho.
So it varied.
And if it was potatoes, they went to either
Cornell or to Wisconsin.
You sent them to the best place and you never had any problem getting them into those institutions.
We had it arranged before they went.
It was a problem because of language.
But they did amazingly well.
Virtually with only a couple of exceptions.
that didn't get degrees, all of them got degrees, meaning that they were pretty well selected.
In a couple of cases when they didn't, I think they didn't have the stability.
They got nervous and health problems came in, but there were very few.
Okay, we've got some more questions on this.
Well, I was just wondering about that, but do you have something else that you want to continue on?
I have a lot of questions.
Okay, go ahead.
Okay, there's another issue that I wanted to talk about, and that was, we've already talked about this somewhat, and that's cultural problems, dealing with American scientists abroad, and how at first they didn't want to accept anything that you had to say, and then afterwards you became somewhat of a hero.
Would that be too strong?
With the farmers, I think the skepticism was because of the setting especially.
Well, I think it's generally everywhere.
Because until contributions are made by a scientist, there's a big doubt.
I saw it in our own society when I was in high school.
I've seen it everywhere I've ever been.
I think it was probably at its worst in Sonora, Mexico, because of the fact that this visionary leader, Don Rodolfo, Elias Caiz, when he was governor in 1934, had set up this beautiful station, well-equipped with machinery and blooded animals and the whole thing that came into being, I suppose, probably began to operate in 1937.
By the time I arrived in 44, it was a shambles.
No animals, machinery, none of it operable, windows busted out, complete disaster.
One variety of wheat that had been put out from that station, which served very well for the first couple of years, was mentana.
Then it got cleaned up with stem rust three years in a row.
When we walked in,
kind of environment we found.
And the community leader, the ex-governor, ex-son of the president, was completely disillusioned.
The only way back was through results.
So, then after 1956, when production levels were soaring and Mexico became self-sufficient in wheat, then they must have changed their attitude tremendously.
Yes, and it began to happen with the varieties as early as 1950.
Agony was prolonged with the fertilizer for another two or three years.
Oh yeah, we talked about the fertilizer problem.
Went through the same agony.
And then by about 1954, Rodolfo Cais, the same person that had the vision of making that beautiful station, came out and he said, all right, we're convinced.
Now we want to know how to put this station back into a functioning organization.
so that the people who are working in agriculture will have the things they need to work with and that you won't have to live here like in the miserable conditions you're working in now.
And I told him that it was the wrong place.
At that time we still had no roads, just dust.
One season a year with dust that deep and then when it rained, mud.
And it was this old station was about...
20 miles from town, no rural school for the families of the staff.
Even the water from the deep well was salty.
A whole series of problems.
And we didn't have any transport.
We had one old broken-down pickup that's for the whole staff.
No assurance there was going to be much more budget.
So, I suggested to them that we should
He should try to find a piece of land close to the city.
There was then a gravel road running out south where we wouldn't have to have hanging around our neck the problems of the children and family of the engineers, of the technical people.
And he went, the leader that he was, got his hat and went to all the agribusiness, including the commercial business,
whether they were selling clothing or what.
He knew how to shake the tree.
He got enough money, and he bought 100 hectares of land that was still in brush, about six miles south of Ogrigón, which is where the Ciano, the main Northwest Research Center, is today.
And today that center is called Ciano.
This is the Spanish acronym for
Centro de Investigación Agricola del Noroeste, which is the northwest branch of the National Institute of Agricultural Research, INEA.
And that station today has probably had a bigger impact on training scientists, wheat scientists, around the world than any other single station over the last 25 years.
And not only young people, but also visiting scientists and administrators.
That was established in 1955.
But even more important, about a couple of years later, Rodolfo Caiz went farther.
We had the damnedest bureaucracies.
Well, they still exist in most places in the world, but I kept telling him that when we ordered things,
sometimes be a year before he gets such simple things through the ministry as notebooks and paper and pencils and so he took upon himself to organize what we call the patronato para investigación agricola which is the literally translated be the patron in support of agricultural research the farmers contributions directly out of sales
not by law, just by voluntary contributions.
When they sell, it was so much a ton on all of the wheat layered into cotton, beans, rice in those early days, the whole thing.
That has grown into a statewide organization to which all farmers contribute voluntarily.
Big, small, the collective heat of farmers,
It was started like I used to get.
To support research.
So we'd get some freedom of movement.
Yeah.
Because these funds, originally he made a mistake.
They went into the, he would collect them, send them to the Ministry of Agriculture to disperse them.
Yeah, you were telling me about this.
And hell, none of it came back and it didn't change a bit.
Right.
And finally he stormed down there in New Mexico City.
At that time, he wanted me to go with him to the Director General's office.
I went with him.
I didn't do any talking.
He said, my God, we took this money out of our own pocket to support research on the crops that we are interested in in Sonora.
He says, I'm not saying that the money was not used for research, but we have no interest
we Sonora farmers in working on Hennequin down in Yucatan or sugarcane in Veracruz.
We wanted for the job that's needed in Sonora and he got a concession from the minister that the monies would be left there and that they would set up a committee elected by all the farmers' organizations.
of the president of the so-called Patronato, a vice president and a secretary treasurer, and then the representative of the Ministry of Agriculture was an ex officio, a member of that committee, and they would sit down with the director of research in Siano, the regional center, and decide how those funds were to be used to make them most
Did you have any input there on how those funds would be used?
Oh, in the beginning, in a general way, yeah.
So they would just ask you if you weren't on the board?
That's right.
And this has been very useful.
As a matter of fact, the publication now is being put out by R. Simmons.
I should say that there are six states that have this organization in Mexico now.
And it protects you from the political winds also.
Right.
It gives great flexibility.
They have a fund that the Director of Research, it's a pretty good sized one for his operational fund.
He'd go down and sign a voucher and get anything the day he orders it locally.
And then once a month the committee meets and clears the book.
Worked wonderfully well.
But how much does a farmer give to this?
It's varied with time.
Originally it used to be, as I recall, 50 centavos.
This was when the peso was worth some money.
But it's... I mean, is there a percentage of his income he's supposed to give?
Like he gives a tenth to the church or something like that?
No, but they change the quota periodically.
I can't even tell you what it is now because of the inflation that's going on and how the adjustments have been made, but it generates a large sum of money.
And these are used mostly for financing today, purchase of equipment, but even for sending scientists to meetings outside the country, all sorts of things.
It gives the director great flexibility in handling things.
Very, very useful.
Then this also, after the disaster, while I'm mentioning it, I think it might fit in here.
You may want to race it again later.
They had contributed this way from, what did I say, 55?
then until about 65 when it had proven itself to be very useful in 65 when that wheat seed was shipped to India and Pakistan that didn't germinate and when Rodolfo Caius heard about this he came storming down to the minister's office and he said this is disgraceful but it's not only happening to
That seed came out of the government seed organization, which was Monopoly, ProNazi, ProDuctora Agricola, Semillas Nacionales.
And he says that's the kind of seed we've been getting very often.
To make a long story short, when we saw it wasn't germinating, we had to double the seeding rate over there, the seed arrived late,
Six weeks late, the war was on between the two countries and it was a mess.
We started planning and we saw in a week that the damn stuff was germinating poorly and were scratching around.
So we had to send telegrams to all the government offices to double the seating rates wherever it was being planted.
I think if it hadn't been for the war, they were too busy at that.
They'd thrown us out of the country.
Yeah.
I wired back the well house to find out what in the hell went wrong.
And, of course, the government seed organization, pro-Nasi, was accusing the shipping line of having fumigated.
But the Minister of Agriculture sent an inspector up to their warehouse.
They came out of Mexicali and took samples out.
It germinated anywhere from 10 to 30 percent over-fumigation in the Mexican government seed warehouses.
Kayese heard about this.
He came storming down to the ministry and he says, you see, that's the kind of seed we get too.
It's not just what goes outside.
It's disgraceful.
He says, we're paying, at that time, it was essentially half of the research money for the wheat program and the corn program in Sonora.
And we want half of the basic seed.
We'll multiply it ourselves.
We'll name technical people to handle it.
And he got it.
That was about the last thing he ever did because he died in Houston with open heart surgery right the next spring.
But I had written to him and told him that despite that disaster with the seed, there was no question this was going to fly.
He got that letter when he was in the hospital about three days before he died.
He was happiest to be.
But if he'd lived one more year, he'd seen the whole thing flying.
But he was very proud of that new research center.
And I expect doubly so because of the disaster of the first one that he'd organized.
There is something I wanted to talk about dealing with culture again in Mexico.
I read that you helped devise a Mexican little 18.
Yes, sir.
Dr. Niederhauser.
How did you get involved in that and why did you get involved in that?
Well, I had a son.
I have only one son, Billy.
And John Niederhauser, our potato scientist, had two sons.
And in 1955, we hit on the idea of start Little League.
So he and I organized the first Little League, the Aztec League in Mexico City in 55.
continued to work with that as long as my, that and as Billy moved to Colt age, established Colt Leagues and, well, Pony first.
Pony and then Colt.
He went through all three.
And I worked with teams, I managed teams for I guess 11, 12 years.
And these were American kids and Mexican kids?
They were all mixed up together.
One of those teams, the last one when Billy was in Little League, I guess it would have been, I don't know, it must have been 60.
It was one of the good teams that I've ever seen.
They won 28 straight games.
They were tough.
Yeah, they must have been.
I wanted to ask about... And the idea was to give the kids something to do.
Oh, sure.
And it became highly popular, you know, spread all over Mexico.
I wanted to ask you, in 1956 Mexico fed itself, it was self-sufficient wheat, but were there any negative aspects about that?
Oh, it depends on where you sit.
Yes.
Would you explain that?
Of course, as was to, we didn't hear much about that in Mexico.
We didn't get all the sophistication that we got.
ten years later in India and Pakistan, when you get all of these clichés that the Green Revolution makes the rich richer and the poor poorer, which is a bunch of nonsense in the first case.
Because they would say that the little farmer couldn't participate, and yet, of course, in Mexico
These wheat spread all over.
Everybody was growing wheat in a few years' time.
The use of fertilizer was harder to implement because of credit.
And you learn from those experiences that we had in Mexico.
used our experience when we got to Pakistan and India to avoid some of the same problems.
But in Mexico, it went without difficulty.
We had the usual noise in the beginning that the Mexican wheats were inferior to the imported ones.
They used to import half of their wheat.
And in the early years, intentionally with the limited budgets, we didn't put in a wheat quality laboratory.
We would take a few samples and send them out for milling and baking to the USDA laboratory in Beltsville and to General Mills in Minneapolis and rely on this.
There was probably 1 20th of the number of samples we should have milled and baked.
But in 56, when we saw we were self-sufficient, then we got the laboratory.
Then we started training people in this also.
actually bring the millers in and show them how to use the weeds right.
We trained people.
Subsequently, many of those technicians, not the scientists, went to the established laboratories in the milling companies and in the bakery.
One of the technicians that's
The head technician today in the biggest bakeries in Mexico came out of this program also.
So they moved all across the line.
Now, Mexico wasn't so sophisticated at that time as in Indian Pakistan when we started moving things like, for example, pricing.
Since Mexico was importing half of the wheat, and I saw that there were abuses very early
by the milling industry, the old mixed types, the farmer in the Bahia, the central area, he was completely unorganized.
Kayes had organized farmers co-ops up in the north, and he could talk to the millers and get a fairer shake.
But the little guys in the central part, they were loners.
milling companies would come and say, oh, we don't want your weight, it's mixed.
Because they'd get an import permit, import U.S.
weight.
And then a couple, three months later, they'd go and offer that guy half or 60% value of what they paid for the import.
Just abuse it.
I could see that by the time we, by 1948, I could see that
Yeah, when we put out a new variety there, we're going to get into the same trouble.
So I went with Farrar to see the Secretary of Agriculture, and I said, look, this abuse is going on.
He said, well, what are we going to do about it?
I said, well, it seems to me that all you have to do is to don't give them any permits.
I need the milling companies unless they buy all of that grain and they pay essentially the price for the international market because it's a small amount anyway that would be blended and mixed.
He used to smoke a pipe and he'd sit there and he said, that sounds pretty reasonable.
And he did.
But by the time we got to India and Pakistan with all of those fancy economists sitting up there and having opinions about everything that was right
holy and economically sound, it was a different ball game.
But in Mexico, we had a minimum of this kind of nonsense.
It was in the next goal where we started running into this.
Well, let's get back to some of the negative things.
Now, you said that that depends on who you talk to.
So, in other words, some of the Millers
Originally, they used to say that our weeds were bad.
Then they become our best supporters.
And what about the poor farmer?
I mean, in order to give this type of production, costs must have gone way up.
Machinery, fertilizer?
No, the same machinery.
Fertilizer.
We had to convince the government that they had to provide
credit for that little guy through the small vehicle bank to give him fertilizer on the credit, which they did.
Of course, the corruptness that was always in that bank probably increased because more money going in, more sticking in the pockets.
But still, it came out in the end.
Also, one other thing that happened
When that little farmer saw the benefits from the fertilizer and the seed, very often he would work out some kind of arrangement on his own for one of the farmers who had some machinery to plant his land for and to even harvest his crop.
Combine harvesting came in fairly early.
So that old stuff about the Green Revolution made the rich richer and the poorer poorer, what would be your response to that?
My response to that would be that if they thought that a technology that increased yield dramatically alone was going to correct all of the social and political evils from the time of Adam and Eve up to the present time, that's pure
nonsense.
The benefits of transfer of benefits from a new technology has to be provided in another way, either through taxes or through credits or a combination of those, taxes and credits and availability of inputs.
If you... To spread those benefits out to the society then?
Sure.
And of course the person that
benefits most in the long run are the consumers in any case, because higher yields, so long as they're achieved with reasonable pricing on inputs and grain, results in more food at less price, and it passes on down to the consumer.
But it was amazing how fast it went to Mexico once it got going.
When we talk about these social benefits, we'll get at it in India and Pakistan.
That's the place to talk about it.
Okay.
According to that Facing Starvation book by Bickel, he says that the same acre that was producing six to ten bushels of grain in 1946 was producing 46 to 60 in 1956.
Is that an accurate statement?
Yeah, in 56, and now in a good year it'll produce.
How big a field is he talking about?
He's saying the same acres producing six or ten.
And now in a good year, in the hands of the best farmers, it'll produce 105, 110.
Is that in the same Mexican areas?
My goodness.
It's even had a greater impact indirectly because these early maturing varieties permit double cropping after wheat.
A summer crop is planted in Sonora under irrigation, the soybeans or sorghum or corn after wheat on the same land.
If it's in Dubai Hill, it'll probably be sordom after wheat.
And this happened in India and Pakistan also, because there's earlier maturing.
See, with the old varieties, you couldn't believe.
Okay, earlier maturing, so now they have enough time to plant another crop.
And with proper fertilization, no problem on depleting the soil.
Same thing's happening now in Argentina with the new early wheat varieties that yield very well at establishing records there also.
In the last three or four years, 6 million tons of soybeans have produced, 80% of them in double crop wheat land.
And the variables here from going to 6 to 10 bushels per acre to 105 to 110 are
A variety will set the ceiling, how high you can go.
Yeah, the variety is the, okay.
Then the fertility, soil fertility.
Right.
Proper use of the right kind of fertilizer.
Proper, if it's irrigation, proper timing of water.
Control of weeds.
And then built in, mostly in the case of wheat, is the disease resistance.
Right.
We don't have many insect problems on wheat.
Once in a while you have to.
control a nasal problem, but very rare.
And then, of course, the economics, price of the input, price of the fertilizer, credit for the little guy to buy it, and then the price at harvest that reflects the international price for that commodity.
And did you attempt, now that you're bringing about this spectacular increase in production, did you attempt
or did someone in the Rockefeller Foundation attempt to get the Mexican government to bring about these credits for the little guy?
So, the Rockefeller Foundation itself was, in a sense then, attempting to get the Mexican government to set out what we have in America here, you know, like the farm banks.
Yeah, indirectly.
It was done informally.
In those early days when we talked, every couple months with the minister, about these problems, just informally.
And then through these farmers' co-ops, through CAIS, every once in a while, when they were dealing on, before planting, on the price for the grain for the next harvest, he would tell the government purchasing agent, I want Morlog here sitting in on this.
I might not say very much, but if he wanted some information, he'd turn to me.
But later it was like I was kind of an uncle to both of them, both the government grain buying agency as well as Farmers' Co-op, but no official title.
This is what happens, you see, with credibility.
It's very important in me.
Once you've established your confidence, personal credibility, and they know that you're for the
good of the general public, and that you're a friend.
You can do many things that probably their best national can't do.
It's incredible how this works.
Kind of frightening.
And that's why these short-term assignments are not very effective.
USAID was moving their people every two or three years.
You could never establish this credibility at the grassroots level and at the government level.
And if you were in charge of it, how would you change that?
10 or 20 years to complete?
Yes, but since USAID programs are under State Department regulations, they shift their people, and so this is the way it goes in USAID.
But it puts great limitations on the effectiveness.
But they may, I was talking to some of the directors about this just last week, or two weeks ago.
relating to forestry programs of theirs.
And I said, well, at least can't you keep them in the same region, even if you shift them to countries, so that they're in the same cultural setup and sometimes linguistic?
And they said, well, maybe we can find the flexibility there.
You're bringing about a tremendous change in productivity in northern Mexico.
How did the press deal with you?
The Mexican press.
Originally?
Well, in the early times, of course, there would be certain individuals there that are ideologically anti-American.
Oh, yeah.
And because of the histories of the countries.
And once in a while there was one person in particular who used to pour out
He's still around in government service, but he doesn't make much noise anymore.
And there's a different change, even in those who do this.
But he was a newspaper man?
He was a newspaper man?
No, he was a government employee, but he used to be a freelance writer at the same time.
Oh, I see.
Generally, the newspaper men, I never had very much trouble with.
After I got to a point where I speak Spanish fairly well.
The one thing you have to be careful with in Latin America, I think it's in general in the developing nations.
The press is very young and inexperienced.
And so you have to have great patience.
And when you're talking about a point, you've got to approach it from about five different directions so that you're sure they understand it.
With a veteran reporter, you can go pretty fast.
They'll pick the grain out from the chaff.
But with young people, you've got to have really a lot of...